# NFL Draft: Does Draft Round Affect Players’ Career Earning Potential?

With the 2019 NFL Draft a week away, there are countless experts going
round-by-round, and pick-by-pick, trying to predict where each player will be
taken in the draft. This is not one of those articles. I decided to analyze the
draft from a different perspective.

**How does draft round affect career earnings?**

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1200/1*3GfmdT1--nUV52nDxP7zlg.jpeg)

While NFL prospects eagerly wait to hear their name called from the podium, I am
curious to know if the round a player is drafted has any affect on his career
earning potential. So, I collected 20 years worth of NFL draft data from
Pro-Football-Reference.com, and combined it with a list of the top 400 current
players by career earnings found at
[Sportrac.com](https://www.spotrac.com/nfl/rankings/earnings/).

The chart above shows the median career earnings for the 400 players by draft
round. As expected, the median earnings for players drafted in the first round
is the highest. I was surprised by the high median earnings for players drafted
in the sixth round. After digging into the data, I realized that there were some
big name players drafted in the sixth round of their respective drafts, notably:
Antonio Brown, Jason Kelce, Mason Crosby, and of course Tom Brady.

Since I’m only looking at the top 400 earners, it makes since that there isn’t a
huge difference between the median earnings after the first round. This prompted
me to group the players by draft round, as seen in the chart below.

When we look at which round these 400 players were drafted, we see the majority
of the top earners were drafted in the first three rounds. In fact, with the
exception of Drew Brees (second round) and Tom Brady (sixth round), the players
making 100 million or more were drafted exclusively in the first round.

This seems to indicate that career earnings are affected by draft round, but I’m
not convinced yet of a cause-and-effect relationship. There must be other
factors to consider.

**How does draft round affect career length?**

In the table above, I combined twenty years of NFL draft data grouping the
players by draft round selected and career length in increments of five years.
The number that jumps out at me is that of 4,612 players drafted, 60.9% have
playing careers of five years or less. Using this number as a baseline, we see
that first and second round players have significantly longer careers than later
round players. Additionally, the table shows that 16.6% of players from the
first round have careers longer than 10 years. The next highest round is half
that number.

Now, there are many factors contributing to a player’s career length. The two
primary factors being health and talent level. Since football is a physically
demanding sport, there are countless players who’s careers have been cut short
due to injury. In regards to talent level, you have to consider whether the
player fits the coach’s scheme, has made any year-to-year improvement, or had
any playing time opportunities.

With these considerations in mind, let’s look at how career length impacts a
player’s career earnings.

**How does career length affect career earnings?**

As seen in the chart above, career length has a significant impact on career
earnings. Players who have long careers make more money than players who have
short careers. This is an obvious point, but it’s important because as we saw
with the earlier table, 60.9% of players drafted have a career length of five
years or less. Further, 93.2% of players drafted over the past twenty years have
had a career of ten years or less.

Since the NFL implemented the rookie wage scale in 2011, career length has an
even greater impact on career earnings than in prior years. Now players need to
make it to a third or fourth contract to really make “big money”.

**Final thoughts**

While there is no reason to believe that there is a cause-and-effect
relationship between the round a player is selected and their career earning
potential, it is clear to see that players selected high in the draft tend to
make more money than those taken lower in the draft. It’s easy to say that the
better players are selected in the higher rounds, but every year there are first
round busts and late round gems.

The real takeaway is that career length seems to have the most direct impact on
career earnings. Talent level does play a roll, but a less talented player with
a playing career of more than 10 years can earn significantly more money than a
talented player with a shorter career.

* [Sports](https://medium.com/tag/sports?source=post)
* [NFL Draft](https://medium.com/tag/nfl-draft?source=post)
* [NFL](https://medium.com/tag/nfl?source=post)
* [American Football](https://medium.com/tag/american-football?source=post)

### [Jeff Daniel](https://medium.com/@jeff.daniel77)
